---
layout: page
title: About me
permalink: /about/
slug: about
---

I am a Ph.D. Geography student at the Boston University Department of Earth & 
Environment, advised by Michael Dietze. Broadly, our lab is interested in 
"Ecological Forecasting" -- trying to predict how ecosystems will respond to 
human and natural changes in the future based on our understanding of them now 
and in the past. Our work towards this goal seeks to combine multiple data 
sources -- including field measurements, satellite imagery, and automated 
sensor networks -- with process-based computer models of plant and ecosystem 
function.

My role in our group involves the development and application of methods to 
work with airborne and satellite imagery. These methods primary involve 
"radiative transfer models", which link plant properties such as leaf pigment 
concentration and canopy structure to optical signatures. Inversion of these 
models allows us to estimate these properties from measurements of plant 
optics, which are usually easy to collect and are non-destructive.


# My tools

The majority of our work is accomplished in R. For computationally intensive 
tasks, we use lower-level languages like Fortran and C++. For Bayesian 
inference, we use JAGS (Just Another Gibbs Sampler). Our entire lab and most 
of our colleagues use GitHub for version control and collaboration.

My personal toolbox mostly involves the command line, including a reasonably 
complicated Vim setup (eventually, I will have a post dedicated to my setup).


# About this website

On this site, I will try to share tips and tricks I've accumulatd related to 
programming, data analysis, research, and graduate student life in general. 

This site is operated through the [Jekyll](http://jekyllrb.com) blogging 
system and is hosted by [GitHub](https://github.com). My current theme of 
choice is a tweaked version of the [zetsu 
theme](github.com/nandomoreirame/zetsu). All of the code for this website is 
publicly available in my [GitHub repository]({{ site.github }}).
